 A new era of power has arrived with the Alienware Area 51 gaming laptops, intentionally engineered to push more power to the CPU and GPU for maximum performance. Combined with Intel Core Ultra 9 processors, merging CPU and GPU and integrated GPU into one AI optimized chip, it delivers fast, smart and seamless performance across everything you do. And with the new cryo chamber design, Airflow is focused exactly where it's needed most. Fused with Alienware's enhanced thermal solutions, it creates a higher power output without raising noise levels, allowing you to play with confidence even during the most demanding marathon gaming sessions. So no matter what you're playing, Alienware ensures every game runs precisely as its developers intended. A new era of power is here, all you have to do is take it. Our Area 51 today at www.alienware.com slash area-51 laptops. This week on Retronauts, pool hall thrills. Hello, and welcome to Retronauts. This should be episode 653 if I'm counting correctly, and I am your host, Kevin Bunch. Today we're going back to not the primordial days of coin-operated video games per se, but definitely the era when you had the first trilobites crawling around or swimming around. What did trilobites do again? I don't remember. I don't know. Existing fossils. Yeah. Underwater? Crawling around underwater for sure. So we're discussing what is generally dubbed the Bronze Age of video games, which spanned the 1970s, led into the Golden Age, which really skipped a generation there that most people seem to really be more familiar with, the Golden Age of arcades, when you had the big hits like Pac-Man and Donkey Kong and Mr. Do. Sure. But the Bronze Age is really fascinating and has a lot of really cool concepts and games that are just really forgotten or overlooked nowadays. And I'm really excited to talk about them, and I brought you two folks to chat about them too. Wonderful. So who do we have to my south? Well, I can't really... Oh, oh, to your global south. To my south. Yes. Yes. South of D.C. South of D.C. Oh, yeah. Wait, wait, wait. I don't even know where you live, Kevin. You're in D.C.? Yeah. Okay. My geography is a little hazy. Anyway, I'm Benj Edwards. I am... I don't know what I am anymore. Right now I'm an AI reporter for ARS Technica. I used to be a tech historian. I guess I still am in a way. And that's me. You never truly get out of it. Yeah. And who do we have up in New York State? Hi. I'm Nate Lockhart. I'm... I guess we call ourselves citizen archivists. Is that right? And then at Gaming Alexandria Space. But I do a little podcast called The Memory Machine, which kind of talks about pop culture throughout, you know, all sorts of areas going all the way back to like the 1850s to like 10 years ago with like flash cartoons or something. But one of my passions that I'm really involved in, which we're going to talk about a lot, in a minute, is this early era of video games, mainly the pre-CPU type that are very... That are all TTL, transistor, transistor logic based. And yeah, I've buy up schematics and try to scan them in for people so that, you know, people can do recreations on things like FPGAs. And I've also been enamored with this one particular book. I don't know if you want me to go into that now, but maybe we can talk about it when we get there. But I've got a project having to do with that. So I guess that's me, right? Yeah. I was going to say, you have spent a lot of time in the past couple of years like building your own transistor, transistor logic games. Yeah. Yes. Yes, I have. Trying to repair a couple arcade ones, too. That's impressive. They're tricky beasts. They really are, especially when the schematics have errors in them. And I've referred to it before to other people as I sort of like brute-forced my way through electronics training by taking on these projects. Like you just, you know, you just sort of start on it and you'd be like, well, I want to do this and I'm going to figure it out, come hell or high water. And I guess I did to some extent. It really is. It really is. I mean, I was really interested in electronics for a long time, you know, and I wanted to learn more about it and I would just read books and then it just never stuck. And I think one day I just said to hell with it and I like bought like a small kit and started going to town. So yeah, there you go. And then you got the TTL game bug, which is helpful for this podcast. Yes, I did. We're going to be leaning on you quite a bit. I have the feeling. Oh, Lordy. All right. So what makes these games interesting to you folks? You know, I don't think any of us were necessarily conscious enough to be playing a lot of these games in the arcades during their heyday. Certainly I did not exist yet. So yeah, I was born in 81. So all this happened before I was born. You know, my dad was an electronics engineer. So I grew up around electronics engineers. They were his friends. They were his employees when he started a company later. And he taught me about Bois, Steve Wozniak, when I was a kid because I got an Apple II Plus. Apple II Plus was my first computer. Depending on what you call computer, I had an Atari 400 before that. It was like a game console. Anyway, so I've always been fascinated by the electronics of the 70s. It was an era where my dad was very active doing radio stuff and he was always fixing old toys and things. And so I feel like, you know, when I first started writing about tech and video game history, I was trying to find some corner of the universe that hadn't been really studied very well yet. So I ended up really focusing on the origins of video games in the very beginning. And so, you know, I interviewed people like Ralph Baer, Nolan Bushnell, and Alan Elkhorn, and those kind of people and tried to figure out how it started. And this is such an interesting gap here because like through my work, you know a lot about people know a lot about like say, Ralph Baer stuff in the 60s or the very beginning of Atari, Nolan Bushnell. And then there's sort of a gap. And then you get to like the Atari 2600 and stuff and people focus on the home machines. And then they get to like 80, 82, like the Golden Age of arcades. Like we're talking about like Kevin mentioned earlier. And so there's sort of this gap in history where it's a dark, sort of a dark age, a lost age of arcade history in the early 70s with these TTL games. It's really fascinating. And they, you know, we can't play them on emulators because they're not software in that sense, but they have to be simulated or reproduced. And Nate knows all about that. So I feel like, you know, I've only done limited work in this. If you count Computer Space, my big article on Computer Space in 2011 for Technologizer, that's something that's similar, but that was the very beginning. And also I did a slideshow for, I don't know if you remember Glixel. Glixel was the site run by Rolling Stone. Oh man. I've heard of like a slideshow of early lost Atari games in there. I think they're all TTL, black and white TTL games in 2017. And that's like totally offline now. I need to republish it. I think it's lost. What is, what is Glixel? What is that even like a portmanteau of? What is that supposed to mean? Glue and pixels. Is that it? No. Was Jiminy Glick there? Is that somewhere? God, I don't know. What about you, Nate? Um, yeah, I was nowhere near these games when they were in their heyday. I wasn't born until 87. So for me, this is, this is just sort of like a pure fascination. You know, I've always been kind of interested in video game history and looking backwards. And I think I was first fascinated by them just by looking at Van's book, Van Burnham's book, Supercade back in the day. And she has some, she had some very limited, but there were still some very tantalizing like flyers, you know, for these games that I couldn't play. There were like hardly any screenshots of them, like things like Atari asked, like the space chase. Are you a space? Space race. That's it. Yeah. You know, and just sort of looking at it from afar or computer space for that matter. Um, I remember playing a computer space, a two player computer space at um, Philly classic three, which would have been like 2002, I think. Going way back. And yeah, a fellow named Cassidy Nolan had a two player computer space machine. And that was the coolest thing in the world. And I loved it. And my dad and I played it a lot. It was a really fun time. But, but, but I really got, well, the thing that really sucked me in was when I was 10 years old, I lived in a little town called the Grange, Georgia for about four years. And, um, before and after that, I grew up in Rochester, New York. But they had this book there that was just absolutely fascinating to me. And it was called How to Design and Build Your Own Custom TV Games. And I was always fascinated by the idea of, you know, video game creation. It's something I always wanted to do. I messed around in like basic, right? For a little bit. Um, you know, I looked at like C++ code for a minute and got super confused. But this was something else entirely. And I saw like, this book has, you know, diagrams of control panels and like little like crude illustrations about what the games are supposed to look like. And these things in them that I don't know what they are. They're these weird diagrams. I'm going to take it to my dad and I said, dad, can we do this? You know, can, can we take a look at these games, see what they are? And he was like, oh, oh, oh, no. He's like, these are schematics and absolutely not. But it was something that just stayed in the back of my brain for decades, honestly, until, until really the pandemic hit. And, uh, I had a lot of time. And I remembered that book. In fact, I had gotten my own copy by that point. And I had dabbled a little bit with electronics here and there. Like, I think I built like a little LM 386 amplifier, you know, little things like that. And, um, and I built a, uh, a joystick converter for a TI 99, uh, because they use this weird diode switching system. But, uh, I opened that book up during the pandemic and looked at it and was like, oh my God, I get, I get this now. I understand this. I know what this is doing. I could do this shortly. Um, and that's what sent me off this dark, dangerous path I've gone on. Um, and, uh, and now I've, I've built a few of these things and I think it's just absolutely fascinating what you can do at that level. And, and I could talk more about it when we get to like how these things actually work. Um, but I just think it's magical, you know, these things that just don't have any code, but they're all working through these, uh, extremely well timed five volt pulses, all working in symphony with each other. And it's super cool. Super cool. You have the forbidden knowledge now. Yeah. Yeah. You can call it that. There are very few, very few people alive who know how these things work. So you may be like, we need to guard your life. You know, it's funny you say that because it's one of those things where like, you know, you think like, oh, well, if I can do it, it can't possibly be that special. Like, like if I could do it, then surely anybody could do this. Right. Well, they would have to be interested in it. Yeah, that is the stumbling block. Yeah. Yeah. All right. But hey, maybe someone will hear our conversation and be, and also think, oh, this sounds rad. I want to mess around with TTL. You know, there is one other guy who is in our gaming Alexandria discord and he is actually not too far away from where my in-laws live. So next time I go out that, that way out to Northwest Indiana, I'm gonna, I'm gonna, we're gonna, we're gonna hang out. We're gonna have a good time. There you go. You'll have two thirds of the world's TTL, arcade game knowledge in one place. He gets to be there with Ed Fry's. Yes. At least a Triumvirate will be complete. At least two thirds of them under the age of 50, put it that way. Most of the other guys are kind of getting up there. But yeah, if somebody hears this and wants to join in our madness, please. For the love of God. Yeah. You know, I need somebody to talk to about the stuff who wasn't my very patient wife, who's very supportive, you know, but, you know, if it comes a time when she just says like, I cannot remember what I had for breakfast. But I know about these cascading counters that you've been working on. Like, anyway. And as for me, so obviously I was born 83 well after the heyday for these games. Like I said earlier. But around 92 or so. I remember finding a book at the library. I mentioned it before, but it was Craig QB's Winner's Book of Video Games. And he has a chapter in there where he just sort of talks about some of the older games from before the golden age, because his book came out in like 82, that you can still find in arcade. So he's talking about a lot of 70s games. He talks about like computer space and Pong and space wars and a few others off the top of my head. I can't remember. But I remember finding that really intriguing. And then a few years after that, I remember going to Cedar Point in Ohio. I think it was like a school trip or something. And they had a little arcade in there at the time. I guess a big arcade, really. And they clearly hadn't been updated in years because it was full of machines from the 70s, both video games and some of the electromechanical machines, which I spent a good chunk of time in there and quarters. Nice. Yeah. So that's where I got to first play Space Invaders and Atari's Tank or Key Games. Key Games Tank, yes. Yeah. Very technically not the same company, but really. No, we all know. And a handful of others. And I thought they were really cool. And that's also when I first realized like, oh, these early Atari 2600 games, these are just home ports of these 1970s games that I can actually play. Yes. So that sort of put me down a rabbit hole. And I've gotten to play a few more over the years. I got into play Pog and Computer Space at like gaming events. And a couple of these have FPGA recreations so I can play them on the mister. I think a couple have been redone an emulation on MAME. But yeah, there's only a handful of these 70s games I've really gotten to play with. But I've I've seen like footage. I've talked to people who played them or have written about them. And they're really, really cool. And it's very interesting to see how they sort of worked around the extreme limits of what they had to work with at the time, both before and after. Like microprocessors just started getting introduced into the mix. A long time ago, someone told me I should dress for the job I want. But the job I wanted was talking about video games. And let's be honest, I aged out of the video games podcaster uniform of logo teas and blue jeans a long time ago. But the thing about dressing nicely is it's hard to find dress pants that look sharp, but also feel comfortable without spending a lot of money. Thankfully, this holiday season, a little star shown its light to lead me to a true miracle deal maker pants by public rec, which look great, feel great, and will make your CPA say great as well. Now, our sponsors want me to tell you about how awesome these trousers are for hitting the golf course. But let's be honest, we all know that the only golf I ever play has a T&E soft logo on the title screen. These trousers deserve more authentic praise than me bragging about their fit on the back nine. They're made in a crisp five pocket style that suited for more than just recording chats about video games, but still comfortable, breathable and durable enough for those long, grueling studio recording sessions. And I can definitely vouch for the fact that they look damn good with either a press shirt and dressy jacket or a more casual sweater look. And now is a great time to upgrade your wardrobe with something like the deal maker because public rec is running their biggest sale of the year. For a very limited time, you can get 25% off your entire order at public rec.com, whether that's deal maker pants or something else. I picked up a waffle knit hooded sweatshirt that genuinely turned out to be the nicest hoodie I've ever worn. Great fit, great materials, great cut. So stop suffering the indignity of lesser pants and give the gift of comfort this holiday for a very limited time only shop the holiday sale and get 25% off at public rec.com slash retro. That's public rec.com slash retro to unlock the best savings of the year. After you purchase the last square you heard about them, so please support our show and tell them that retro knots sent you. Give yourself or someone you love the gift of comfort this holiday. Upgrade your wardrobe instantly and save 25% off during the public rec holiday sale at public rec.com slash re tro. So yeah, I think that's a good segue into talking a bit more about what makes these games so unique both on a hardware level and even just like in terms of the cabinet design. Mmm. Oh yes, a beautiful like 70s mid-century modern that like chrome trim, walnut wood grain everywhere. Oh my god, it's beautiful. It's a thing of beauty. I incorporate it into all my work. But yeah, and they're all you're right that they're all like different shapes. You know, computer spaces like a fiberglass cabinet, right? And that was done a few times like very rounded. Yeah, yeah, like in an attempt to make it like futuristic like right. And I think Ellen Bushnell sculpted that shape out of clay and gave it to Ted Dabney who hired a guy who did fiberglass hot tubs and swimming pools or whatever. Nice. And they had that fabricated from the and there's a hole in the back so you could put the circuitry in it, you know, in the TV and everything. And then they put a wood board, think over the back of it. So it's fascinating. I was just thinking maybe we could mention like just the origin of this. It goes back to the origin of arcade video games, basically with computer space and a technological origin is basically, you know, in the in the 60s, first of all, Ralph Bayer and his engineers at Sanders had discovered, you know, how to create signals on the screen and manipulate them. But they actually cheated. A lot of people don't know about this, but they use these Heath Kit signal generators that made spots on the screen. Spot generators. And so Ralph hacked up these spot generators and made it so you could control the spots. He never invented the circuitry to actually, you know, do this by itself. They just sort of borrowed it. And I'm sure that the other the other guys, Bill Roosh and what's the other? Bill Harrison. Bill Harrison. I think Bill Harrison was his chief deputy on building these consoles. So he probably had to implement his own version of that. But, you know, at first, Ralph was sort of like doing a hack. And so when it came to Nolan Bush, Nolan Ted Dabney in the late 60s, early 70s, around 70, 70 ish, they, they he had played. Nolan had played Space War, the mainframe arcade game created in 1962, 61, 62 era at MIT. And so he wanted to put a coin slot on it and turn it into an arcade game because he had worked at a midway and knew about electromechanical arcade games, which predated this stuff. And they were not very reliable. They broke down a lot frequently. And he he was in charge of a midway that had a bunch of these old games that would break down all the time. And he, you know, when he saw this game on the mainframe, he's like, man, this would be a great arcade game. So he thought about, you know, they thought about using a computer called the Data General Nova, which was the cheapest computer at the time, but it wasn't powerful enough and it's still too expensive. Say cheap and scare quotes. Yeah. Chief as in a camera was like 10 grand. 10 grand or. Okay. It was I just look it's $4,000, which was $24,600 and $2011. I don't know what that is. I'm looking at my inflation. I'm looking at my article from Technologizing. So at some point, you know, they put this idea aside, but months went by. And then Bushnell asked Dabney. This is what Ted Dabney told me a direct quote. He said, Nolan came to me one time and he said, on a TV set, when you turn the vertical hold on the TV, the picture will go up. And if you turn it the other way, it goes down. Why does it do that? I explained it to him. It was the difference between the sync and the picture timing. He said, could we do that with some control? I said, yeah, we probably can. And we'd have to do it digitally because analog would not be linear. And so that was sort of his epiphany was like, hey, we could control that. You know, use the vertical hold and horizontal hold and stuff and make the signals around. And then so Ted created this spot generator circuitry himself and handed it over to Nolan, who developed the game logic. You know, some people believe he didn't develop the game logic. I personally do believe that he did, you know, 90% of it or something. And that's how became what became computer space. So that this might segue well into Nate, if you could describe that vertical and horizontal hold control and syncing and stuff like that, like how these games built up. Yeah. So analog televisions worked at, we'll just keep it to the black and white to make it simpler at about 60 cycles per second, right? 60 Hertz. If you're doing interlaced video, you know, that's 30 Hertz per per frame. And per interlaced frame. And the composite video signal, which is what was broadcast out to televisions at that time is made up of these little pulses. And, you know, a TV will look to that and sync to that. And so, for instance, you have like the vertical sync pulse, which goes low is about, I think, 27 microseconds. Is that right? Microseconds. Yeah. Sounds right. Like 27 microseconds. Then you have our horizontal sync pulse, which is like 4.7. And, you know, you can mix these signals together and it creates a raster image. And you can vary the signal going up or down, you know, if we do one volt peak to peak, that'd be, you know, all the way up to one volt is white. And at about 0.7 is black. And anything lower than that would be seen by the television circuitry as a sync signal. So, knowing that, I mean, you know, one of the first things you do when you do stuff with electronics is you play with something called like a 555 timer, which is this really bog simple little chip that you can use to make like blinking lights or a little delay timer, you know, something kind of like that. But you can manipulate those signals and kind of play with them. For instance, what I believe, like what, for instance, what the Odyssey does and what those early Rothbeer experiments do is they simply take the full field of video, they time out what that is. And then they use of like a timer, not a 555 timer, because they just use transistors and diodes, DTL logic, if you will. And, you know, it can squeeze that or stretch it to be what they need. And taking those two things when you have the horizontal and the vertical, you can mix those together with some simple logic and you got a little spot that you can move around. I hope that's not too technical, but yeah. And so what you can do too, and what a lot of these games did, I'm not certain on computer space, I haven't looked at the schematic too much on that one. But what they will often do is they, is they'll set up some logic to do like the little timing pulses for the horizontal and vertical sync. And then they'll figure out what is the, uh, how much time they have to create video lines and have like a series of cascading, you know, 16 or four bit counters to count the lines on a TV screen. They do it over and over and over and over and over and over again. And you have these different frequencies that you can pull off of from these counters and mix them and match them and all that to make shapes and, and, you know, do all sorts of crazy stuff with them, whatever you, you know, you want to do. And, um, yeah, it's pretty genius way to do video games because, uh, it's a hell of a lot cheaper than a Nova computer, which I think they wanted to like network, right? They wanted to have like four or five machines hooked up to the same computer. Was that the idea? The one, what they told me was his idea was to do two off of one machine, just two terminals basically, but it was, wasn't powerful enough to play two at the same time. And so it was too expensive for just one game or something like that. And they just dropped the idea. So. Yeah. I'm going to say the, uh, the Galaxy game, uh, that got, I guess, field tested or however you want to call it, quote unquote, released at Stanford. I think it was Stanford. Yeah. Yeah. That, that used a PDP 11 and, you know, that, that financially made as much sense for them to make two units total. And I think the computer history museum now. Oh boy. At least one of them is. Yeah. I mean, if you look at like, uh, you know, I mean, this is like going off of like 1977, 1978 sale numbers when things were considerably cheaper, but the price really wasn't that different. You know, you could look at like old radio shack catalogs and you can see, you know, how much these things cost, these little, you know, generic logic chips. And, uh, you know, like a 74, 7,400, which is a, it's NAND gates, you know, and gates that are inverted at the output. And they were like, uh, a dollar for like five of them, you know. And so that's nothing compared, especially compared to that. And the fact that you can just kind of hack into a black and white television and inject the composite signal directly into it, uh, you don't have to futz with monitors, you know, that's. They say that computer space and Pong and some of the other early games just straight up use retail consumer black and white TVs. They just popped them in there and wired them up, which was probably the most male, I guess the actual shell of the machine, probably more expensive. But I feel like internally the monitor was probably just by a long shot, the most expensive part of it. Yeah, it could have been or close to it. And I bet too that they probably could find monitors that they got a good deal on. I would have to assume. I mean, that's sort of what happened with, um, radio shack, right? With their TRS 80 model one, like they're like theirs were just sort of repurposed. Yeah. TVC. Yeah. I think what happened probably with the arcade early arcade games was just, you know, when, when Nolan and Ted basically invented this new product category of the retail arcade, you know, video game, there were no monitors. There were security monitors that probably cost $10,000 a piece or something ridiculous, you know, and then there's television sets. And so there was no in between yet. But once there was a market for it in terms of arcade people needing this, I'm sure some purpose, purpose built monitors were created and sold to these companies. But I don't know who did that. And that's another little lost chapter of history. I know Wells Gardner was big into it in the early 80s and late 70s. But I don't remember off the top of my head who was the company that like first got into it. But I remember it was fairly early, like 74, 75. Yeah. I seem to think maybe some Japanese company may have done it first. Might have been. I don't know. I don't know. So maybe we should just describe Galaxy Game just for a minute, which is that, you know, in 71 before computer space came out in, I'd say, November of 71, something like that. In the summer, I think it was the summer of 71, a couple guys, Bill Pitts and Hugh Tuck, or is it Hugh Tuck and Bill Pitts? Okay. Those two guys, names interchanged. They created this game that Kevin mentioned that used to PDP 11-20, I think it was. And it was the first version, I think it was it was a version of Space War, basically. First of all, the game from MIT that we mentioned earlier. And it had a vector display and they put a coin slot on it and they put it in the Treseter Student Union in Stanford and they charged, I don't know, like 10 cents a game or something like that. And it was popular there at the Union. And but because of, you know, the cost involved, obviously they couldn't deploy these computers everywhere. So it never went any farther. They made a second version later that was like two games on one machine or multiple games. And it did beat, you know, computer space to market as the first coin operated video game, you know, technically. But it wasn't a commercial product that they sold as a product to others, you know, to make money. And so the first commercial arcade video game was computer space in November 1971. So there we go. Set the stage. If you want to play Galaxy Game, I mean, you just play Space War and pretend you're putting coins in. There you go. Spent a long time building it up. Maybe we should talk about the games. The games themselves. No one's still listening. I don't know. Some of these are really cool. And I think what makes them really interesting is just like the hardware design is really fascinating. Even beyond what we've talked about internally, we talked a little bit about computer space. But, you know, this was the era when electromechanical games were still king, at least early on. And they take a lot of cues from those, both in terms of where they'd be deployed or even, you know, where they could deploy these, where electromechanical machines could not actually fit. So you'd see them in like pool halls and bars and taverns and bowling alleys, etc. But also they took some of those electromechanical visual cues. So one that I really like pointing out is to Ramtex Baseball, which is one of the first coin up games or video games, really, to have representations of like little people, which it does in TTL logic. I think it might use a. It uses it uses a couple of proms. Okay. I was going to ask is that one diode based or they actually have like a rom for the graphical. They did start doing that. They have a little rom. I think it holds about like 128 bytes. Like it's not much, but it's but it's plenty for like a little stick figure. Yeah. But what makes it fascinating is that if you look at the machine in a picture, probably you're not going to actually see the machine. But because it's it has that, you know, overhead view that a lot of baseball games did at the time. So they mounted the monitor in such a way and built the cabinet in such a way that it looks like you're having a bird's eye view down at a baseball stadium. So like there's stadium seating surrounding the monitor. And that is like such a cool design. It did not work out very well for the machine because the early ones were holding the monitor up with like material that could not support the weight and they would just sort of collapse. Yes. But they look so cool up until that collapse. Yeah. There were a couple others that did that too. Like Chicago coin, I think had a couple like TV Goldie is one that does that where they kind of have like, yeah, that bird's eye view. Looking at it like, I think like a soccer game is like the the conceit. Of course, it's just like a pong style game. But but the conceit is soccer and you get to look down in on it. And like you're looking down on a like you're looking down into a stadium. It's pretty cool. Or or Super Flipper. You mentioned Chicago coin. They put out this game called Super Flipper, which was a video pinball machine. And they designed the cabinet to look like a pinball machine with like there's you have the back glass and then we have the little play field and that's your like video screen. And you use the buttons on the side of the cabinet to like work your flippers. What year was that? Do you know? 75. OK, so Atari beat them because there was a game called Ping Pong in 1974 that I think was probably the first video pinball game. I think it is. And yeah, super cool as well. I would love to see that in person. It's a wild looking I mean cabinet. Do you count Exodus TV pinball though? I know. Is that like when did that come out? That was 74. Seven late 73. But that was more like a paddle. It is. Yeah. Yeah. Oh yeah. I remember that. But the idea was to like a pinball. The cool thing about Super Flipper is that it still uses electromechanical sounds. So it still uses like the bells of like an electromechanical pinball game. That's cool. Yeah. And it has like a back glass that lights up, you know, just like it. I wouldn't even know how to begin to emulate that. But it looks so cool if you like look up a video of these things. You can find video of a good chunk of like 70s games. If you know what you're looking for. Sure. By the way, this reminds me this is this is a weird story, but there was a guy who used to work at my dad's company named Dave. Can't remember his last name right now, but he he worked for midway or something. I can't remember now. And it was in the 70s and he when the 2004 chip came out, you know, in 72, he created one of the first microprocessor controlled. I don't know if it was a pinball game. There's like a bowling. I think it's Bali, Bali alley. He he worked on Bali alley and I thought that was really cool. It was it's an electromechanical bowling game. It's not a video game, but it had it was one of the first to have a microprocessor in it like really, really early like a shuffle alley kind of thing. I think you yeah, have like literally probably have a ball and you roll it down or a shuffle puck or something. I can't remember now, but it's I mean, I'd love to see that. So that's my one little that the reason I bring that up is just because of what you mentioned the hybrid nature of these early things where people are trying to figure out how to do these arcade games and what elements they should use. And so here I'm talking about the sort of the opposite of what you're talking about. You're talking about a video display with some electromechanical parts. And this was a electric mechanical machine with software logic for one of the one of the first times that happened. And so there's this this interesting hybrid period where these things are kind of mixing together these different technologies. Absolutely. Yeah. It's very like interesting to me trying to delineate like, OK, where does electromechanical end and video game begin? Because there are some real edge cases. There's like a skiing game. Yeah. Allied Leisure. Allied Leisure ski. And it is technically an electromechanical game. Made to look like a video game. Yes. Made to look like a video game. So like it's in a cabinet that looks like a video game. It has a screen and it's like a projector screen that's like rolling through stuff. That's actually exists. But it's designed to look like the hot new thing of video game and then put it up in like ski lodges. Yeah. You know, there were a bunch of electromechanical games that used projection. You know, I think Atari even licensed one from Namco, like called F1 or something in the 70s. I can't remember where it. But it was like you sat down in a cabinet and saw the screen, you know, as a film of someone racing. And somehow you could control it a little bit with a wheel. It's crazy. I'd love to play that. Like what the hell happened to this? Yeah. That is an amazing lost piece of history right there. You know, like, man, I would pay a million dollars if I had a million dollars to just go like go see those in person. Like if there was a room full of all the lost arcade games ever made if mechanical video, whatever, like that would be so incredible. That's my time machine with Wish. That's a good one as far as I'm concerned. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, I know some like of these 70s video games and EM games, like they're around. Like I think the Strong Museum has several, I think. They have pin pong in there. Oh, wow. They don't have it on display right now, but they do have it. Time I go to Rochester, I'll have to bug them about it. Yeah, I need to go up there. I've been invited many times, but I never went just because it's so far. Yeah, I know. It's super far for me. I only go once a month. It's hard. There's also an arcade in Young's, not in Youngstown, but near Youngstown, Ohio, that has a bunch of electromechanical games that have been meaning to really take a drive out there. And I mean, it's several hours, so it's not an easy drive for me. But retro and lots field trip is in order. All location in Youngstown. Yeah. Well, you start in Rochester and then you go to Youngstown and then you go to Michigan for what's up there. Marvin's Marvelous Mechanical Museum. Yeah, there you go. We'll go to San Francisco. The Musée Mechanique, which is at Fisherman's Wharf. I've been there three or four times. I don't know. I've been there once, but I've been to Marvin's a ton of times because I used to live nearby and it was the only arcade worth going to for a couple of years there. Yeah, my brother used to live in Youngstown. I'm mad that I didn't know about that while he lived there. I think it's a recent development. Oh, OK. And there's a place in the Twin Cities or near the Twin Cities that has a bunch of electromechanical games. I've heard about that. I haven't been there, but heard it's good. Getting a little afield, but that's fine. Yes. Yes. Yeah. That kind of podcast. Yes. The RetroNauts arcade, ancient arcade bucket list. Listen, we're just telling people like where they can go to find 70s games because you can't really emulate most of these. You can't download them. I mean, a lot of the schematics are on there. And, you know, I guess you could build them off of that if you really wanted to. I wouldn't recommend it, but you can do it. The White Mere and the Footsteps of Dome. Trying to find a woman who's never, never, never been born. You're standing on the hill and the mountain of dreams. Telling myself it's not as hard, hard, hard as it seems. Anyone, anyone listening this far into this podcast is part of a secret society. Secret society, the TTL worshipers or whatever. You know, like there's such a niche upon a niche, like, I don't know. Yeah. We should probably talk about the games there. This is where Jeremy Perish was smack me around. We need a strong man in charge, Kevin. Listen, we're all a little punchy today. It's fine. Someone needs to put a tent on this circus. But it ain't going to be me, but somebody's got to. But I was just going to say, like, you know, a lot of these aren't emulated or even simulated or, you know, remade an FPGA. No. And, you know, this was the 70s. They did not have high production runs. Like, Pong is a massive outlier. Most games got like 500 or so. Computer space had 2,000. And that was considered pretty successful for an arcade game. So, like, yeah, when your highs are Pong and like breakout and space invaders, yeah, everything else looks like a failure. But they were all doing decently for themselves. They're just, you know, 50 years old and we're, you know, wailed on at arcades because they were designed for that. Yeah. Doesn't space invaders use an 8080 processor? I believe it does. OK. That should not be in this podcast. Yeah. But I was going to say, even like CPU based games, like, even these are hard to come by and there's quite a few that aren't really dumped or they're, you know, dumped poorly because they were dumped in the 90s before. Yes. People really knew what they were looking for. And they do it even, even then, like, they didn't necessarily always use, like, off the shelf graphic generators. They were using, like, a combination of, like, analog parts and the CPU parts. So, like, but yeah, something like PT 109, which is in the running, is, like, one of the first potential CPU based video games ever made. That, or microprocessor based video games, that is undumped. I have not encountered anyone with a copy of that machine. So, I don't know if it ever will be dumped. There's something like Spitfire, which was written by, or rather programmed by Michael Glass, who went on to, you know, port it to the channel F after the company he was working for went under. But that original arcade game that's never been dumped, it's super rare because they didn't make very many before they went out of business. So it's, like, stuff like that. Yeah. There's a lot of, you know, a lot of stuff that's been dumped. Yeah. There's a lot of fly by night companies like Mirko, Fun Games, Electra. Electra. Electra had some really cool games too. You sure did. That one hurts. Flying, there's footage on YouTube of one called Flying Fortress. And you might consider it one of the first shoot-em-ups, you know. But it goes from right to left instead of the other way around. But you know, you go down, you know, you bomb stuff, but it has these really cool sound effects of explosions and guns going off, you know. But it's all done in transistor, transistor logic, these TTL chips. I really like, there's a few games that use interesting technology to get around the limitations of the sound capabilities at the time. So like, there's Fonz based on Happy Days. Oh, yeah, yeah. And because they couldn't very well emulate the sound of a motorcycle, they just slapped an 8-track in there that had that as like the audio. And I know a few places that have Fonz machines, like the Strong Museum is a Fonz machine. They do not have the tape. Even though you can technically play it, you're missing like a key component of the experience. And then there's a man-eater from another fly by night company, Project Support Engineering, which had a tape deck that could play back the screams of divers as they're eaten by sharks. So like the game itself does have like sound effects, but you know, they wanted to go all in on their jaws craze. Yeah, there was one of those at the Midwest Gaming Classic this year. It wasn't playable. But I mean, that was, that was plenty for me just to see it, just to see like, oh, this game does exist. It's not just a photo on the Internet. This is so cool, you know. That's the one that's like shaped like a shark head, isn't it? Yes. Yes, it is. Which is also amazing. Oh, it's so cool. I mean, I wish it could work, but yeah, it was just amazing just to see it for real. It's smaller than I thought it would be. It's not a very tall machine. Yeah, sort of like what you were mentioning earlier. This is before standardized arcade cabinet designs. And so there's a wild variety. Yeah, you just said Man-Eater was the one with the cassette tape? Yeah. Okay. And there's what about like, wasn't Key Games Tank one of the first games to use ROM chips? I can't remember what it, I mean, I know it used ROM chips. I feel like it was Grand Track 10. That was the first one that I'm aware of. For the track layout, right? Yeah, I think it was for the track. Yeah. Speaking of Grand Track 10, it's one of the few that I've played. I've never played it. That's awesome. They have one at, or maybe it's, it may be one of the variations like Sprint or Super Sprinter, but I think they have a Grand Track 10 at the Musee, Le Mans, over at... Le Mans. Fisherman's Wharf in San Francisco. I've played it. I think it's a Grand Track 10, but it's neat. So it's just an overhead, you know, the field is a bunch of dots, like the track is a bunch of dots and your car can turn pretty smoothly with the wheel and the gas pedals make it go and it's pretty nice thing to play considering how limited it is. Yeah. You know, Indy 500 on the Tari 2600 came with a driving controller. I don't know if you guys know that game, but it's a lot like that and it's really neat how smooth and sort of analog the feel of the driving is. Because it's like a rotary encoder, right? Yeah. A rotary digital encoder, if I remember. Yeah. So it's rotary with no stops. There's no, you know, it just can rotate as much as you want. And yeah, it's a nice experience. It's something just, it's one of those unique little experiences in games that I like, I've always craved that you don't, most people don't know and have never experienced. It's like just like, what's the coolest, weirdest thing you can do on a Tari 2600? I'd say get a Indy 500 play with a driving controller or play Arkanoid on NES with the Arkanoid controller or play like, you know, Star Raiders with the Star Raiders controller. The video, the video touchpad. Yeah. The video. Yeah. Or you could program basic on it, right? Yeah, that's true. But now this is, we got sidetracked, sorry. It's okay. It's like arcade games. We've driven off the course with Grand Traff. Iron Traff. Yeah. Firetruck is crazy. It doesn't have two screens or something or there's two people playing. Well, you have like, there's a two player version, right? Yes. Someone driving in the front and then someone controlling the back of the engine. Yeah. Like a real firetruck. They have one at Gallup and Ghost, but the little in Chicago, but the last time I went there it was not working, unfortunately, but that's a really cool game. I think I've seen it at Fun Spot as well up in New Hampshire. It's another one that Strong has. Yeah. It's, it was pretty, I think it was pretty popular for the time, you know, relatively speaking, but it's pretty cool. I was just thinking of how they had like, you could see a very clear difference in how different countries approached racing games as their developers. So like Atari had these top down games like Grand Traff 10 and Sprint and Indy 800. And then in Japan, you had like these racing games that were more focused on your vehicle and you were sort of driving along a track that would come down the pipe at you. So you had stuff like, you know, it's Fonz, which became, which was originally what's Speed Race. Something like wheels. Speed Race became wheels in the U.S. and Fonz was something else. Yeah. And yeah, they take different approaches to like imitating sort of speed and momentum of driving. And then there was the one in Germany. Yes. Yes. Nebergring, is that how you say it? Nebergring one. I don't know. If someone who's German will probably get mad at us for mangling the pronunciation. But like, so that's a game that is, that's like not only is it TTL, but it used something like 28 boards. 25. 25 boards. Yeah. It's a lot of boards. Yeah. There's a picture of it online. You can see it's, it's not very good quality, but you can see it. You can see that the cage, you know, with all the TTL cards on it, just filled with chips. Yeah. There's like two or three of these machines still like floating around in Europe. I'll probably never see one in person, but, but it was very interesting because the developer of it was a Dr. Rainier Forst, who was very interested in driving simulators and bought video games, like specifically the TTL technology that Pong used would be really good for that versus, you know, a projector, a oscilloscope arrangement. So he designed this machine and like it was a hugely popular when he debuted it. And problem is that it used so many circuit boards and he was practically a tiny little operation that he could not fill all of those, which means that someone else did. Yeah. Started off with digital games. One of their people saw the machine while he was in there. Ted Michon, he went to West Germany to fix a develop a defective shipment of their game air combat. He saw Nubergering at the same time Forst was there like giving a demonstration to some kids. So he got to learn how the machine worked and he went home and made his own version of it. Cool. But because Mike Renetics was tiny and didn't have much capacity either, they re-licensed that out to Midway and I believe Atari. So that's where you got 280 Zap and Night Driver. Yeah. And Mike Renetics own version, which I get off the top of my head when it was called Night Racer. That I didn't know about the I didn't know that the Nubergering connection was that close. That's cool. Yeah. So it's cool. Oh, man. It's like a game that exists by pure luck like Night Driver and whatnot. But if you've ever played any of those games, they are first person driving games, which big, successful genre nowadays, very hardcore fans of it. And they got it start with this TTL era gaming with a couple of games that I'm pretty sure are also not emulated because Night Driver was a TTL game. I've always wanted to play the original arcade Night Driver. I don't think I have, you know, if obviously played the, obviously I played the 2600 version. Sure. As a kid, I loved that game. It's just, that's so funny how you can be enthralled by a bunch of little dots like moving on the screen and you feel like you're driving a car. Wild. Yeah. In the 80s, we were happy. I've gotten to play Night Driver a couple of times. I've been to a couple of arcades that have had it working. And it's very cool because, you know, the dots are moving around and you have like the gear shift and the wheel and pedal and all that fun stuff. But there's no like image of your car on screen. It's a decal. They have a decal on the cabinet to show where you are like physically located. And if one of the lines on the road gets too close to your decal, you like crash and stop and have to restart moving. It's such a cool like arrangement. The year was Night Driver. I'm looking for the 76, I think. 76. Okay. I have a bunch of Atari Flyers in folders by year, luckily, because I did a slide show once and I'm like, I have like every game Night Driver. Yeah, I see that. That's cool. It has a decal. So the overlay and decal thing is another one of those hacks, you know, that a lot of early arcade games did because they had black and white screens. And sometimes they needed a graphical element that was far beyond the resolution of ever being able to display on screen or something color, you know, so they would use an overlay transparency on the screen. Or like, I think I saw one, you mentioned the baseball game that has like the stadium. I'm sure that's like, you know, not on the display itself, but I mean, not generated in video. No, it's physically there. Yeah. Yeah. And this outlaw, I'm looking at, man, Atari outlaw never, this is crazy. It's a very weird looking game. Yeah, it has an overlay of like a old West town. Not the 2600 game, right? No, this is an arcade game. There's so many weird arcade like our Atari games that no one's ever heard of. Yeah. There's one called cops and robbers that I've never. What the hell is this? This is like four people play. This is from 76. There's like four joystick looking things and wheel. I don't know what there's pedals, foot pedals. And that one's outlaw is a light gun game. Yeah. Outlaw has a light gun stunt cycle. Yeah, that's a cool one. I've gotten to play that one again up in ghost. That's a fun one. I mean, I could go through. Why don't I just read these like while I'm looking at them? Let's go back to 73 just real quick. I mean, we mentioned gotcha and 73, which I think did we like a sort of a chase game and it had the weird dome pink dome controllers for a limited time. Yes. That game's interesting to me both because it's one of the first color games. They had a variant of it that they only made like a couple dozen copies of that were cut in color. But also because if I remember right, I think Al Elkhorn described it existing because of like a glitch with one of the Pong machines that they were trying to figure out. And he realized like, oh, I can use this to like generate a maze. I could make a game around that. And I'll bet that's where you got gotcha. Yeah, that's clever. I could see that. I bet it had to do with the score. I could see that. I'll bet it had to do with the score. Like being repeated, like parts of the score being repeated over the screen because you kind of have to and I'm not going to get too technical again here. But basically you create the score by like using one of those things that drive seven segment displays, you know, for numbers. But instead of like wiring it to lights when you use the decoder, you wire it to like frequencies of the television. And and you get the little outs, but you get the number output. It's a really easy way to do it. And but you have to window it. You have to otherwise it'll like repeat all over the screen. So yeah, I could totally see that. Oh, that's so cool. I love that. Yeah, I don't know if you've ever seen it in action, but it is like a very visually arresting game to see just like because I feel like that's sort of true of a lot of TTL games that in motion, they don't look like a video game like you do generally think of a not frames of animation. It's completely smooth, right? Yeah, it's weirdly smooth. And I can understand why they kept using it up until like 1980 or so. I think is when Sega's Monaco GP came out because like I've gotten to play that before at a New Jersey arcade. And it's just like so cool to watch the track just like smoothly shift in size and like you're entering a tunnel. And it just all like works so well and it's wild. Man, I want to play that. There's something about the aesthetics of this that's really fascinating too. Like I was describing an experience you can't get anywhere else kind of this. This is like on a real CRT with the real chips and the real thing is something that's will will never be perfectly simulated. You could probably do a pretty good job with certain enough resolution and everything, but it's it's an experience unto itself. The phosphor glow. Yeah, let's go back to the like space race. I skipped space race. I think that was Atari's second game, right? After that sounds right. Yeah, you know, you there's two players, they're going vertically. You're avoiding things. They're like avoiding stars or something. I don't know. I've never played that. There's Pong doubles, which is doubles for people two on two. Then in seventy four things start to explode. We've got World Cup football, which is European like multiplayer Pong. Grand Track 10 was seventy four. It's just one player. The Grand Track 20 was seventy four. Yeah, it's two players in Pong. We already talked about Quadra Pong, which is a really neat machine. It has four players there. You know, person is guarding a sort of hole on the sides of four sides of the screen. But not the first four player Pong game, because that's a tennis tourney from Allied Leisure. Oh, God, I think it was just like two on two. That game. I just I fixed one of those not that long ago. The fun thing about that game is that well, paddle battle was the the main one, right? That Allied Leisure did that was their big Pong clone. Yeah, I think for a long time, didn't they sell like more of that sold than Atari's actual Pong? I believe so because they had more capacity to like produce Yeah, that's then Atari did. Yeah, absolutely. And it is almost exactly the same game. Like it's the same chips and everything. But my board through Gaming Alexandria, I was able to procure about 10 or so TTL boards to see if we can get them working. Currently working on Ramtech baseball. It's slow going, but, you know, we'll get there someday. And we'll have footage on on YouTube, a streamed, you know, a captured footage. But, you know, we'll get there when we come to it. Anyway, so this paddle battle game and I was looking at the schematics for it. And I noticed like things didn't like add up, but there was paddle battle on the board, like emblazoned under the solder mask. You know, there is paddle battle. And I keep working on it and like something's not right. Like the edge connector for the, you know, hookups for like TV and controls and all that. There's too many pins on this. Then there aren't the schematic like and come to find out later on, you know, I did some digging and like, oh, they released a four play version called tennis tourney. And that's what this board is. And so then after, you know, you figured that out, it was just, you know, balancing the. Analog signals, which is a whole other thing, which we can go into when we talk about. Bob's your uncle. That's what challenges. Well, it's on the game and the manufacturer. We could talk about that more when we get into like the challenges of preservation, but. There's way more games than we could talk about in one episode. I'm just looking at like, I probably got to go. Go soon. Yeah. And you're just, and you're just talking about like the, you know, just the Atari stuff. Yeah. Yeah. We're talking like, I'll just rat, rattle off a couple of names. We don't even have to talk about like a quack. Yeah. 74 is a light gun game. That might be worth talking about, but rebound is a basketball game. Super pong. There's something called elimination by key games that might be a version of pong. Something that sounds like, I believe it is. It's like a pager pong spike is a volleyball key game, volleyball formula case. Key games, sprint, super sprint or something or not super sprint, but Grand Track 10. And 75 things start getting more interesting. There's something called anti aircraft by Atari, where two people are shooting. It's it's air sea battle, if anyone played that at all. Yeah. Crash and score, which is like a demolition derby. I would love to play that. That's on the Atari 2600 Indy 500 cartridge. They ported it on there as an extra game. OK. They did. There's highway, which is an overhead driving thing that had a cockpit. I think it may have been Atari's first cockpit video game. There was a cockpit, electro mechanical that I mentioned, the video, the F1, whatever it's called. But jet fighter, that's like one of the combat games, basically from the combat cartridge. They had a game called Jaws. It's about. Shark Jaws. Shark Jaws. Shark's a very small prince. Sorry, yeah. Shark Jaws. Yeah. Steeplechase, horse racing, pursuit, which is looks like another plain type game, but first person, maybe combat. That's amazing. Yeah, we've got tank. We mentioned that by key games going to 76. We've got, of course, breakout, which was I could talk for a minute about the origins of breakout. We did a breakout episode a while ago. We delved into that a fair bit. But you want to dig into it more. Tell you himself about how it got created. He did not tell me personally. No, I'll just briefly, briefly, briefly mention that I think until I interviewed was in 2007 and talked to him about video games, very few people knew that he designed one version of breakout for the arcade. And I asked Alcorn later, you know, Was says that, you know, Steve, it was Steve Jobs' project, you know, it was assigned to him. And Nolan Bushnell told me it was his idea or something to design the game. I don't know if that's true. And he's assigned it to Steve Jobs. And Steve got his friend, Was, to build it, of course. And there's all these famous stories about it. But so I guess people did know, but people didn't know that Was thought it was the version that was released. That's what people didn't know. Oh, yeah. Alcorn said no. I mean, there's no way we would release this thing. It had like, we're like five chips and no one understood how it worked. And, you know, like, if I remember it, didn't have sound effects and like the scoring was like analog using a digital count or not. Digital counter like a counter outside the game. And they're like, yeah, this is not workable. Yeah. So I don't know who designed the final version of breakout, but it has that weird cool little story. So I'm sure you talked about it in the episode. And I couldn't break Was's heart and tell him like, no, man, it wasn't your version. He still swears to this day that it's it was the version that was released and all this stuff. So bless him. Yeah. Fly ball, which is some kind of arcade baseball game by Atari. We mentioned this cops and robbers game is wild. Somebody's got to look into this. Some four player like it's got Tommy guns and model T people cops and robbers. Like a maze craze. They're facing off shooting each other. It looks kind of like spy hunter from overhead, but with four cars. And it's wild. And we've mentioned Night Driver. That was in 76 outlaw. We mentioned that Sprint two looks like another version of Grand Track two. Grand Track 20. Sorry. 77 Canyon bomber, which is a 2600 game, isn't it? Yeah, I got it. Ported directly. Yeah, very faithful by David Crane. Right. Yep. Yeah, that's a great game. Sprint four is four players. Probably that's not key. It's sorry. That's neat. I think Sprint four might actually be an MPU based game, microprocessor as well. So we're getting into the microprocessor. Yeah. Sprint eight is an eight player game. Sort of like Indie 800, which is a wild speaking of weird experiences, like I'd love to play a player's playing an overhead Indie 800 at the same time. That'd be fun. Like that would be wild. I've seen a video of that on YouTube and it does look absolutely wild. It's like a whole family playing Indie 800 at some location in I think Italy. Yeah. And how about Starship one that's probably micro presses are based, right? This is sort of like. It's a so Starship on the 2600 is a port of it. But what's interesting is that Starship one came out like a month or two before the 2600 port. So Bob Whitehead must have like just been like looking over the shoulder while they were building that game out. It's like, all right, all right, taking notes. Yep. And so we're getting into like this, you know, there's a game called Triple Hunt Superbug Superbugs cute. 78 has football, which was a pretty famous game. It was a trackball. So that's microprocessor based on P.U. Yeah. I think Atari at that point had fully gotten out of the TTL. I mean, not that they didn't incorporate TTL elements. I mean, a lot of arcade games still did. But you know, TTL was much more failure, pro and more expensive to like build out. And you couldn't just like design a basic hardware standard and like tweak it as you needed. You have to like redesign the hardware from the ground up every single game. Right. And it wasn't the main driver of the game at that point. Like TTL would be used for things like sound graphics if they didn't use a dedicated video processor, you know, things like that. Yeah. Like, yeah, this was an era where like Sega got really big into video games. Like, yeah, like head on at the microprocessor game. But like that was a huge hit for Sega. Yeah. Head on had some kind of port on the 2600. What was it called? Dodgem. Dodgem. Yeah. I like that clone. They got cloned to like everywhere because it was such a huge hit, especially in Japan. I know. Exedy had one crash. Yeah. Exedy had crash. Exedy had Death Race, which is one of the first controversial games. That's full TTL. That's full TTL. And it's super cool to actually sit down and play. Yeah. Death Race, they have one of those in San Francisco at the museum. Museum Mechanique at the dock. Galloping Ghost has that one too. Galloping Ghost does have that one. Death Race. That's one of the earliest games I've played. Yeah. Your friend in mind, Ethan Johnson and I played that when I went to visit him and when I visited in Chicago and we spent a day at Galloping Ghost, hitting up all the weird old arcade games we could find. I enjoy that. Exedy like reworked Death Race into Score, which is probably the first game with an animated woman. But we don't know for sure because. Surprise, it is unpreserved and the only couple. I know, historian Kate Willard's been like trying to track it down and she's come across like three units and none of them work. Oh, wow. So who knows? Who knows for sure if it's an animated woman, but it's like the concept is like Death Race, except you're like chasing people around to score. Quote unquote. Yeah. But it's sort of like equal opportunity, horny. I think is the best way to describe it because like you're not necessarily chasing women and like the women can chase men. I'm not positive entirely at how it works because it doesn't exist in any sort of playable way. But it sounds interesting. The interesting thing you're talking about space invaders and how like, you know, that sort of is where like the line begins to blur a bit as they get to more CPU stuff. You know, while it did use an 8080, it still had TTL stuff. But Sega did make a full TTL clone of space invaders called Senken Yamato. Which is insane that they bothered with this. I can't imagine. I can't imagine. One of the silly little games that I built, the Stormtrooper attack is sort of a space invadersish sort of thing. But it's just like one row of squares that you got to shoot. But to do like all of that and they have like full alien figures and everything like that. That thing's got to be like two boards at least. Yeah, at least. At least. There's so much of these cool games. Yeah. I want to play them all. I want to play Drop Zone 4 because it's like this one was from that lecture or was that one? Meadow games. No. Yeah. So the concept there is you're like dropping bombs on targets. But it had like an anti-war Easter egg in there. So if you drop all your bombs and none of them hit a target, you get a free game. Wow. Love it. It's such a cute little idea for your war game to make it not a war game. And something else too. You mentioned we were mentioning like the interesting cabinet designs and how they kind of went all over the place. But there was like one area where they really like stuck to a certain aesthetic and that is absolutely those cocktail table games. You know, because they want to like sell them to be like, oh, this is for the lounge area. You know, and so like there's just these simple, handsome, woodgrain tables, you know, for things like like flimflam from Meadow games had that with like a little little miniature analog joysticks so you can move along both the X, your paddle could go up and down the X and Y axis. Yeah. So there was like that uniform factor there with those cocktail tables. And it's very funny that the way you look at some of the flyers for them and it's like guys in leisure suits and girls with like these giant bell bottoms and done in these beautiful like watercolor paintings of like, yes, we're going to we're going to talk about our new Plymouth Roadrunners and play some flimflam. As you do. Right. And drink some cognac. Sure. Anyways. But yeah, and there's a lot of interesting pong clones too. Like digital games had one that's intrigued me for a while called knockout. So like instead of, you know, just trying to get the ball past the other player, each player has like a row of breakout style bricks behind them. This is of course pre breakout and the book you have to hit the other players bricks to win a point. And so that's that's very interesting. And I would love to play that. Really like playing with the sort of the premises on a lot of these, which is really cool. Yeah. A lot of playing around. I mean, that's kind of like what like Queen clean sweep is, right? Like, you know, here's a paddle game. What else can you do with paddles? Collect dots. You talked about that in your breakout episode. But yeah, strangely influential clean sweep. Yeah. And like the exodus TV pinball, which is sort of like a game that Ramtech developed but never released called knockout. But Ramtech and exodus are kind of the same thing. They had a lot of the same personnel. Yeah. I think what happened is they probably just licensed it or sold it or something. Like how Ivy? Because like a lot of these companies, like they were, you know, straight up like pirated clones of games. But there's also some very like murky licensing arrangements and sub licensing. Yes. So and that crossed over oceans too. I just watched a video uploaded from I think the accounts Onion Software on YouTube. Yeah. But it's this Japanese, you know, game historian. And there was a Taito event a couple of weeks ago as of this recording where they were showing off a bunch of like their early 70s video games. And he was there with Tomohiro Nishikato who designed Space Invaders and they were going through them all and they had a copy of Ramtech's clean sweep. But it was a version that Taito had published because they had licensed it and there was a couple other games from Ramtech and I think Midway that they were showing off as well. I need to. That was cool. Bookmark this. Tornado baseball. That was the other one. Midway is like a microprocessor based. Yes. Sequel, if you will, to Ramtech's baseball, which they had licensed for themselves. And released unchanged as Ballpark. Yes. Yeah. And you can play tornado baseball on the Valley Professional Arcade console. You sure can. I have an astrocade, but it doesn't work. I just never got it working. So Ben Jedds words had to take off for the rest of this podcast. So we are moving along with me and Nate and we will include his where you could find him at the end of the video. We will include his plugs at the end of the podcast. It's getting very late here. Yeah. So yeah, I wanted to talk a bit about some of the preservation status of these games. We've talked about a lot of like really cool ones and what makes them interesting. Yeah. There's still a lot we haven't touched on, but we only have so much time. Right. Got to cut it off somewhere. Oh my gosh, I mean, you can go on. And one more thing I want to touch on too before we talk about the preservation challenges is that a lot of these games are still very fun to play. Absolutely. You know, I mean, breakouts still great. Like it still grabs you. Death Races a blast. Clowns is great. Yeah. Circus like the little ping ponging clowns bouncing up to balloons which have poured it around everything. That game is excellent. On the 2600 I'll play that for an hour until I get a score on this. I'm satisfied with my personal favorite dog patch from Midway, which is the best way I can describe it is like, what if you played volleyball with guns? It was the inspiration of the recent game Hyper Gunsport, which is just that. Because I think it was Brandon Sheffield and Frank Sepaldi were playing this Midway arcade game at the California Extreme some years ago and Brandon was like, oh, that's cool. I'm going to make that again. It's still influencing people. Yeah. These old video games. But yeah, they are a challenge. They pose a challenge. I mean, first and foremost, simply because these aren't software. There's no, you're not running any code. A lot of them aren't software period. So no, nothing. You're talking about circuits that you have to implement into an FPGA, which, you know, that's kind of what FPGAs are good at. It's doable. Or you have to make it work through software using like soft lists. I think they're called. Yeah. I mean, there's ways to do it. I mean, at that point, you're sort of simulating and you're really going for like the feel, like really trying hard to nail the feel. FPGA, though, will more accurately than anything else we have at this point will get you what the actual circuitry is and does. Yeah. So that's a challenge. But FPGAs can be worked with. Especially if you have schematics handy and a good high quality picture of the board, you know. And ideally someone who can like play test it and make sure that it's lined up. Yeah. Yeah. Make sure you got it accurate. Right. Right. Because that can happen. And especially because oftentimes these schematics will have errors in them. And, you know, having the board, a good high quality picture of the board handy can help you look at the trace exactly. So you could say, okay, that's why this isn't working. Yada, yada, yada. And which could be a little daunting if you're like me and doing this for some reason. And you have Ramtech baseball, you know, and that's two boards, two big, big boards. How big would you say that? They're like poster sized, right? Yeah. Somewhere around there. And they're a small poster size, like whatever you would call that, 18 by 11 and a half, something like that. Right. 11 by 17. That's it. 11 by 17. And they each have about 100 chips on them. So, you know, that's, that's a lot of work. But yeah, having the schematics and pictures handy is very nice. There are some, I have one. It's from Digital Games. It is one of their like Pong compilations. They had some companies did this where you could play like a few variants of Pong on them. And one of the things that they did to combat people copying their games is Ataris was a little bit more clever because they would do like the, the, the ROMs, right? They would, they would give the ROMs the same nomenclature as the 7400 series logic. So it was like confused people trying to rip off their game designs. Less clever in the case of Digital Games is they just scratched off the label of every single chip. So like, cool. I can't do anything with this. Like, I mean, I do have, I have a cheap e-prom burner, but one of the things it can do is it can identify logic chips. So I could desolder each and every single one of those chips and put the each and every one in there and see what they are. Of course, this doesn't take into account what happens if, you know, it doesn't work and it can't identify it and then you're just kind of screwed. And for a lot of these lower run games that we have, the schematics are just not out there, you know? I mean, for Atari, they've been on there since the nineties. Not really. Pretty good quality for some of them. Yeah. The quality is pretty trash for a lot of them, but that's getting rectified too at this point. It's getting better. But yeah, for some of the smaller run ones, you're just kind of SOL. And, yeah, that's a big problem. Again, errors and schematics can make things kind of a nightmare. When I do those TTL builds from that book about building your own at home, every single one of the schematics, every single one had an error in it. Some of them less egregious than others. Sometimes it was just the pinouts being incorrect, which is, you know, I can work with that. And you could just sort of match up the data sheet of the chip with what's in the schematic. I could be like, oh, that got mixed up. I see what happened. That's not the big of a deal. The bigger problem is when there's like a mistake in the actual, like, routing of the logic. And that is so hard to suss out. And luckily for the book that I'm working on, every single one of these builds has a circuit description. So you can look in and see, like, okay, so when he designed it, this is what he was trying to do. And so, so when I hear like what he's trying to do and what is actually happening on the board is I could wait against each other and I could say, like, okay, there's actually supposed to be an OR gate in here that's supposed to go in between these two things instead of Andy. Where did he draw this up the wrong way? Right, right. And in some cases, like sometimes I wish I could talk to the man who wrote it, David L. Heiserman. Unfortunately, he passed away in 2020. So I'll never know. But I get the feeling that he designed these things, that these were all just ideas and he never actually built any of them himself. I do believe that. You might be one of a handful of people who ever has. Yeah. I mean, there's one other guy I found, one. And he only built one game. It was one of the simpler ones, but he did do it. What do you want to now? Like three? Three. Three. And I've started slowly on another one that uses slipping counters, which is. You think I would have had a hard enough with the pinball game. You're making a face. So I think. Yeah, it's not a great time. No, it's hard. I mean, it feels so good when you get it working. Like, I think the first time when I got the video generator board working, like I was so excited. I took my son, who I think was four at the time, four or five. And I like airplanes spun him around my head because I was so thrilled that like I figured it out. But yeah, and that could be a real headache. And another thing that's a problem too, with keeping these boards going is that there are different. Versions of these 7400 series logic chips and they each work a little bit differently. You have LS, HC and HCT. And I mean, that's just for starters. And they work a little bit different. I won't get bogged down with details. This is not the kind of podcast this is. So I want to respect the people who are trudging through this part. But there are other like weird ones. Like so LS was sort of like the first big leap from just Playdoll 7400 and it was a lot more power efficient. But like each brand sort of had like their own weird version, like Fairchild had the F series. So 74F00. And because these things, the timing is just a little different. So, you know, you're supposed to be using this logic to, I don't know, put together a aircraft figure or a spaceship. And it doesn't look right. It's like wigging out, you know, and it's like spreading across the screen. You feel like, why is that? It's like, oh, because I need to use the C variant of this chip and I substituted an LS chip, which was period appropriate, but not for this specific use case. And so because of that, that can be a real headache. And, you know, Joe, just magnify that for multiple boards for something like 8800 or Norbert Ring One or what have you. I could never. You have to deal with all that for all these boards. And, you know, there are people who probably love that challenge. I clearly you do. I do. I do, honestly. You know, it sounds like, you know, I'm complaining here, but I do think it's very interesting and something I do to kind of keep pushing myself. Forward is, you know, is as long as I learned something new, if I did that or I fixed a single issue, if I could do that in a section in a period of time when I'm working on a board and I have to leave it. If I've learned something or if I've been able to repair one element, then I've chosen to take that as a victory. And when you take that approach, I think it becomes much more enjoyable. And then your mind starts to reel about like, you know, I wonder what else you could do with this. Like, you know, like, what if I made one? Like, what would that be? You know, how you're designing like it's 1973. I have this hobby computer sitting next to me as a quick tangent that somebody designed a couple years ago. Actually, not that long ago, like last year. And it's a fully TTL computer using about 60 logic chips. It has like six, six 40 by four 80 VGA output, one color, of course, you know, white, but still, it's pretty cool. And, you know, as you get into it, and I'm like, you know, but what if I used TTL logic and some 555 timers to turn the VGA output into composite output? And if I did that, then I could use the weird NTSC color encoding and make color. So what you're saying is the next Rochester Maker fare, you're going to have a very strange, like unique computer. I have been to the Maker fare a couple of times. That would be very 70s, you know, when people were just designing their own computers. Yeah. Yeah. But that's another thing entirely. But yeah, it is very interesting. And then, you know, you can look it up with your oscilloscope and you can kind of see how all the timing works and how the things go, you know, when, when this pulse goes up, then this one goes down for two cycles. And you can actually hook up your oscilloscope and see it in action. And to me personally, that's very thrilling. Your mileage may vary, but for me, it's pretty cool. When I try to read the paper, I fall fast asleep. As soon as Father goes around, I lay on the weekly burdens down. I put on my flat racks and paint the tires. I'm Yeah, but those are just some of the challenges. And there are others. Like I said, I'm forgetting his real name. His username is Dilweed. And you can see some of his stuff on YouTube. And you can see some of the stuff that he's working on. And it's very cool. So shout out to him. He's like the other guy under the age of 50 who does this stuff. So like this is very like, you know, a lot of emulation of old video games is very much based on like what our people interested in. And it makes sense if you don't care about, I don't know, the the Dick Smith wizard, then why would you bother writing an emulator for it? Right. And I think that's a big issue that a lot of these games have because, you know, a lot of them have these very small production runs. A lot of them were destroyed in like the 80s and 90s because there was no real like market or aftermarket value for them. You know, God, if I had been collecting arcade machines in the 90s, you could have picked these up for a song, you know, I. Yes. I know. I don't know a friend whose dad used to deal in arcade machines. I think he might still and he's mentioned that like, yeah, in the 90s, you couldn't give these things away. We had like a warehouse full of 70s machines that I wish we still had. They were less than worthless. Yeah, they absolutely destroyed them. So there's not very many of these around anymore. A lot of them are in private collector hands. And yeah, like that's a whole other like scene that for the most part is not necessarily even online. A lot of these people like just know each other through old time messaging systems. You're right. And if they are online at all, it's through like some sort of quasi use net style of thing. Yeah, there's like there's a Facebook group for Bronze Age arcade games. And I feel like that only has like a small number of the people who are overall there. Yeah, there's a discord too. But that's like seriously, it can't be more than 40 members on that discord. So like, yeah, you have this very like niche number of people who are interested and they don't necessarily have the right skill set to like translate these into something software emulatable or through FPGA. And there are a couple of people doing that like a guy, a guy who goes by the name of Jimmy Stones, who I think you know about. He's a he's a Mr. Developer and he's done. He's got several projects that are like TTL based in varying stages of completion. But even he's run into the dilemma of, OK, are these schematics accurate to the machine? Right. Where can I find like video footage of it running or like images of the boards? And like so I know he has several that are near ready to release, but he hasn't released them because he's not sure if they're actually accurate yet. So he's trying to get that information together. I think Clean Sweep is one of the ones he's working on. Clean Sweep was one of them. He sent me a list a while ago. It's pretty extensive. But does he does he have a Patreon? I don't think so. Maybe he does. That should be if he does, that should be plugged. He can be the the Jotago or Jotago. I don't know if he's Spanish. Yes, he can be that but for the 70s. Right. Right. But yeah, like I know it's just been the most recent years like past four or so that like microprocessor based games that had analog sound technology have really started like getting another pass on MAME and have started getting that more accurate. Right. Because again, a lot of these were made in dumps from the 90s that were not they were not done with the accompanying technical information that you'd want today. You're right. Even on top of that, there are and microprocessor based games that aren't dumped because they're super rare and are to come by now. Like we mentioned PT 109 from Mirko. Spitfire from it was Innovative Coin who did Spitfire. I had to look that up. I had never even heard of them until now. And I fly by and look up this stuff. Yeah. And then there's games from like big companies like, you know, SNK is a is a whole thing now and they got their start in the 70s with breakout clones. They had like three of them and I think only one's dumped. And Yo Saku, which is a funky game where you're like shopping down trees. And it was pretty much unavailable to play in any form up until what last year when the cassette vision, the set vision finally had emulated and now you can play their unlicensed clone of Yo Saku. Yes. But that was a very popular game and you can't play it. Yeah. And there will be this is like one of the most fascinating ones to me is Sega's heavyweight champ. Oh, yeah, that game is so you can find footage of this because like news reporting has been digitized and like posted online. I don't know how you'd find it necessarily, but it there are stories about video games and they have like footage of heavyweight champ in there. Yes, from this company called Sega as they call it in the news report. And yeah, I mean, that's the first time like any footage of that game has surfaced. It's like a fighting game. Yeah, right, exactly. And you have these very odd looking controls. I don't even know how they would work. They look like I don't know. They just look like these weird handles that you're supposed to move up and down to like shift where your fists are. And the way that they do like your fighter getting woozy and falling over is like this weird like wavy technique thing that they do, which I'm sure is just pulse width modulation. But damn, it looks cool. It's not something you could do like digital circuitry, at least not at the time. No, not well. Not not well at all. Yeah, like it works really well here. And absolutely a very cool game. I've never seen like an actual machine and I'm not even sure if there are any actual machines of this left. But I mean, again, if they are, it's one of those weird old collector hermets, you know, that really only talks to themselves. And and these older collectors really tend to keep their cards close to their chests. They don't reveal a whole heck of a lot. Yeah, there was there was some years ago, I was trying to track down someone who had a an RCA coin arcade because in 1975, RCA was exploring doing a microprocessor based arcade machine that had sort of the sort of the same basic concept as the Neo Geo where games would come on cartridges. You just swap them out with the 1802. 1801. Oh, yeah. Two chip implementation before the 1802 came along. And they made six of these cabs and a couple of them still exist, because I've talked to some folks I know in like the that are old time coin arcade machine collectors and they're like, oh, yeah, someone has that. I don't remember who. But I can see you. I can track that down. They could not. But. But it's OK. I don't want to delve into it too deep, but I think I've got a lead on something related to it. Cross my fingers. So. But yeah, I'm a really cool machine. But yeah, you can. It is emulated based on the schematics and like what we know about, you know, the sister machines like the RCA Studio two and etc. But yeah, but it would be cool to be able to check that against the real hardware. Right. And you know, get more of the games dumped. But all this to say, you know, like you kind of hit the nail on the head earlier when you're talking about building interest. And it's hard to do that because there's not a lot that's out there. But there is one way and that is to just. I would go on like K. L. O. V. Right. And look up just by year, see what company looks interesting. That made a bunch of weird games and go on YouTube. There's not a lot. But what's there is pretty cool to look at and can hopefully like what your whistle for like wanting to see more of this somehow. And I don't know whose door you would knock down to do that. Somebody maybe start with a tarry. They've certainly been doing a better job being curators of their of their library. Yeah, I made a note in here that there's not a lot of like commercialization of any of these games anymore. No, no. Even ones where the ownership is very straightforward, like Tito's still around midway, like Warner owns midway. Atari still exists as a thing. Namco still exists. So like these are all companies that could ostensibly reissue these games and they could probably finance people to do a very good job of it if they saw reason to do so. But gosh, just getting two player computer space out there would be lovely. I would love that. But according to the Video Game History Foundation's game availability study, only 0.89 percent of games from 1975 to 1979 were currently commercially available when their report came out. And that was basically through the Atari 50 collection and the Space Invaders Invincible collection. And the rate for 70 to 74 was statistically zero other than Pong. So we can't rely on the companies to do this. Right. It's real dire. It kind of reminds me a lot of the silent film world, which is kind of one of my other big passions, which I know you share as well. You know, a lot of silent film is is just gone. You're not getting it back. Yeah. I think it's like 80 percent was the last was the most recent figure estimate for silent films lost. I mean, I don't think you're in that big of danger when it comes to this. For instance, circuit boards aren't as volatile as nitrate, which is nice. They're not going to burst into flame on you. No, no, they might rust. But so I would say that it's not as urgent as silent film. But I think it's as close as you could get without being that. And I do think that there is some degree of urgency that needs to happen, especially as people, the people who made these machines are not getting younger. They're getting a lot older. And so those people are we were losing that wisdom there about these games and how they worked and how they were presented. And the way they work is just not something that's I mean, when I learned how they worked, I just sort of brute forced it, you know, I made myself learn. And, you know, the schematics are things you kind of have to find. And some of them are easier than others. There's only so many copies out there. I mean, for Atari, it's a little bit easier, but for some other ones, like Ramtech Baseball, I hunted literally for years to find a copy of the schematic for that. And I finally found it on a random auction house website for 30 bucks. And I scooped them up and now they're online for everybody. So do your part, support your local electronics nerd, buy old schematics and give them to people to scan. That's my advice to all of you. If you want more reading about any of these things, obviously, you can find YouTube videos. I know I know one source that I always really liked is that I think Jeremy Parrish himself was one of the people who ripped these history of video games, laser discs that came out in Japan. And there's one for Taito and one for Namco. I don't remember if there's any others, but they were the first two Japanese video game companies. So unsurprising that'd be early. But they have some like direct capture video footage of these 1970s games. And that's really cool to see and see in very good quality, especially because I have never seen a Western gun machine running. And I don't know if I ever will. But now I can at least see like how it plays and how it differs from gunfight, the like US adaptation of that game. But also, you know, Ed Freese got mentioned at Fry's. I'm not sure how you pronounce his name, but he has a website at Fry's.wordpress.com where he has several blog posts about repairing some of these machines. It would have been Computer Space, Gotcha, Starship One and Grand Track 10. And that's a very good way to dive into like all the issues with troubleshooting these machines and getting them to work again decades later. Those blog posts are so cool. They're so inspirational to me. They were great. And I feel like I should have tapped him for this at some point. It would have been fun. Yeah. That well. Yeah. And the other good one I wanted to point out is all in color for a quarter, which is no spaces.blogspot.com. And this is a blog that historian Keith Smith ran for several, several years. And he's really done a ton of research into the history of 1970s and 80s video games. And he's had quite a few posts on there about these topics that like these minor players fly by night companies or even the bigger ones like X&D and Ramtech and Midway. So like it's a great resource. He wrote a book that he has not yet gotten published. I don't know where that's at. It's absolutely massive. I have a copy of the manuscript and the doc file takes a good like 40 seconds to load on my computer. That's how long it is. But like it's killing me that that book isn't released. But like he's interviewed people who, you know, have died because he started doing this back in the 90s before any of these people were passing away. So it's a fantastic resource. Definitely hope he gets it out in some form or another. Absolutely. Yeah, it's because the blog posts are so tantalizing. I would love a more thorough read into that. It deserves it. Those people deserve their due. So I think in the end, like check out these games. If you can find them somewhere, you should try playing them. It's an experience you probably won't find really anywhere else. And if you don't have that opportunity, at least, you know, check them out. Look them up, look up some videos, look up some flyers, read about them. They're cool. And I really want more people to understand just like how neat they are in their own unique way. Yes. So I guess we can just call it there since we're almost out of time. Yeah. So this has been Retronauts. It's a Patreon supported show. You can support us at patreon.com slash retro knots. And at the three dollar level, you get each episode one week early and at a higher bit rate. And at the five dollar level, you also get access to our Friday bonus episodes, weekly columns by Diamond Fight, as well as the Retronauts Discord server. So it's a pretty great deal. And I highly recommend you follow suit as I have. And I believe Nate has backing it. All right. Yeah, I'm a member. And Nate, where can we find you on the internet? I can be found on Blue Sky and Mastodon under the Fostodon server at Nathaniel Lockhart, just one word. And it's IEL, Lockhart and HRT. I do a little podcast called the Memory Machine and talk about old pop culture stuff from there was one we did about the history of screens from going from the 1800s all the way up to stuff from 10 years ago and everything in between. Don't update it much. I have two young kids. Makes it very hard. In fact, I think I did like one this year, but I got two recordings scheduled this month, getting back at a baby. So I have that. There's also the website for it. Memory Machine pod.com, which has show notes to my podcast, as well as blog entries for the builds that I have done and some of the work that I've done on 70s arcade games and from the book. And if you want to join me in my craziness, I have put schematics, corrected schematics for the video generation board from the David L. Heiserman book. Um, they're on my GitHub along with PCB fabrication files. So if you want to send them to the PCB fab of your choice, um, I use JLC PCB. You can make those and, you know, descend into madness with me. And, uh, yeah, that's everything. So where can folks find you, Benj? Yeah, you can find me at, uh, at binge Edwards on X, which kind of sucks these days, but also at binge Edwards on blue sky or mastodon. Um, and I am, you know, writing stuff for our technical all the time AI thing. So you can find me there or check out vintage computing.com, my old blog, which I occasionally update every once in a while. And hey, I did a book, uh, that's out this year for all about the virtual boy. On MIT press and you should go check it out. It's called seeing red. Very cool. That's pretty rad. You know, it's hard to get a book out through MIT press. So you should be extremely proud. Yeah. Thank you. It's mostly Jose, uh, Zagals doing, he got the contract first and then invited me along for the ride. That's cool. Yeah. As you can tell, I like obscure and weird video game experiences and that's one of them, the virtual boy, you know, it's great. I'll say that's why we wanted you on here, right? Yeah, thanks, man. And as for me, you can find me on the internet as a uber source, uh, mostly on blue sky nowadays. I'm occasionally checking in on Twitter, but I try not to for my own say, my own mental health. Yeah. I also run the Atari archive YouTube channel and website and Patreon. You can find the YouTube on a YouTube.com slash Atari archive and Patreon.com slash Atari archive. And the website is Atari archive.org. And I also have a book, uh, under the same name that's published through limited run games also available on Amazon.